From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the Daily.
[Music]
After months of delaying his most
extreme tariffs, President Trump is now
threatening to revive the most
aggressive version of his global trade
war. Now, America's trading partners,
investors, and consumers are bracing for
impact.
Today I speak with three of my
colleagues, Anna Swanson, Maggie
Haberman, and Ben Castleman about what
we can expect and what Trump's endgame
might be.
It's Thursday, July 10th.
Welcome to the roundt economic edition.
Anna, nice to have you.
Thanks for having me.
Ben, thank you for being here in the
studio.
Great to be here.
Maggie, it is always a pleasure.
Natalie, it is so nice having you here,
even if I'm not actually with you.
We wish you were here. I want to just
set the table for us a little bit. 90 or
so days ago, Trump instigates a global
trade war on a scale that the world has
never really seen before. Reciprocal
tariffs on a bunch of countries. It's
this seismic economic event. The US
stock market plunge, trillions of
dollars in value are wiped out in a
matter of days. I honestly can't
remember an economic event like this.
And then because of all that fallout and
the outcry, Trump presses pause on a lot
of it. The stock market recovers
and then everyone gets kind of used to
the idea that the trade war is on what
seems like a hiatus.
Now it feels like to the degree that it
was ever suspended, the trade war is
back. He's lobbying these new threats
against countries again on Wednesday. So
Anna, can you just lay out for me the
current state of play?
Yeah. So actually this trade war was
paused, but it never truly went away.
The president had paused his tariffs for
90 days in April to try to encourage
other countries to come to the United
States and do trade deals instead of
getting hit with tariffs. And in the
last 3 months, we've seen this flurry of
activity with other countries trying to
get some time on the schedule of US
officials to negotiate these deals. But
in the meantime, the president did
actually go ahead with other tariffs on
cars and steel, copper, pharmaceuticals.
So even though you know the biggest
global tariffs have been paused, tariffs
have been steadily rising. And right now
the overall average effective tariff
rate for the United States has climbed
up to 17.6% 6% which is actually the
highest that the United States has had
since 1934.
Wow. So it might have felt pause but
it's actually kind of on in a way that
does not feel insignificant. It's real.
That's right. It is on. Of course
they're overshadowed by what the
president is threatening to put in place
just in a matter of a few weeks. He's
now moved his deadline for countries to
negotiate deals or face tariffs to
August 1st. A lot of countries are
working toward these trade deals and
we've seen two of them announced so far,
pretty limited deals, but for many, many
more. The president is sending out these
letters that are going out globally this
week informing countries of the high
tariffs that their products will be
charged as of August 1st.
I just want to quickly ask about the
deals that have come. Anna, can you just
tell me what are those? How should we be
thinking about them? So, one uh that the
president announced with the United
Kingdom in May is really what I would
call kind of a framework deal. So, the
two sides agreed to lower tariffs on
some certain products. And then for a
bunch of other things, they basically
said, "We're interested in cooperating.
Let's keep talking."
Got it.
The other big announcement that we've
seen was with Vietnam last week. The
president said on his social media that
he had reached an agreement with Vietnam
to lower tariffs on some of their
products to 20% with a higher tariff on
some products that would come from China
and that Vietnam would open their
markets to US products. However, nobody
has since released any text of the deal
or even any fact sheets spelling out
what was agreed to with Vietnam. So, we
really don't know at this point if there
is a deal, what it actually includes.
The only thing we have is the president
saying on his social media account.
So, not a ton of clarity.
It's not a lot of clarity. It's not a
lot of substance for 90 days. But again,
I also don't think that's particularly
surprising because doing trade deals is
hard and it takes a long time. And I
think, you know, the administration and
the world is kind of starting to see
that.
Maggie, it's interesting. He keeps
pushing this deadline back. What's going
on here? What's he up to?
Well, President Trump has a history of
moving deadlines, as we know, both in
terms of his life as a real estate
developer and also from his first term
in office. He tends to buy himself more
time to jump from one lily pad to the
next. And that's really what this is. If
you look at everything with Donald Trump
as an ongoing negotiation,
then this makes sense and follows a
logical pattern. And the problem is that
countries engaged in trade can't really
function that way. And so what's going
on here is he is buying himself more
time to come up with something that he
can call a win. Whether that is, you
know, a bunch of frameworks for trade
deals or he is trying to see whether
there is some other kind of a mitigating
factor he could get in terms of an
announcement about a company moving
production to the US and so forth. But
it's a pretty broad range, Natalie, of
what he would consider a win. It's too
early to say that this isn't working,
you know, but it certainly is not the
success that Trump believed it would be.
I'm interested, Ben, in whether it
surprises you that there have been so
few deals up until this point. I mean, I
understand that it sounds like the
threat has not worked, but you know,
there were a lot of countries on this
list that we're going to get hit by
tariffs on Liberation Day, as he called
it. Why didn't they come to the table? I
mean, what's going on there?
Yeah. I mean, I I think on one level,
it's not surprising, right? The idea of
90 deals in 90 days was never plausible,
right? Trade deals take years to
negotiate. But I think that for a lot of
these countries, you know, one, their
their leaders have their own domestic
concerns. They don't want to be seen as
caving to Trump. And look, you know,
Maggie made the point a moment ago
about, you know, Trump having a history
of pushing out deadlines and backing
down on some things. I think that has
been noticed by foreign leaders. And
there's a there's a recognition that,
you know, hey, if we, you know, string
this out for a while, like maybe we can,
you know, get out of some of this. Maybe
some of this doesn't actually end up
hitting us as hard, at least as being
threatened. I think that is definitely
true that countries have realized that
they can kind of, you know, have some
elastic approach here in terms of what
Trump will tolerate. But there's a point
that an economic expert made to me about
how Trump seems to view these tariff
impositions as he keeps describing them,
which is I set the level, you do what I
want, you give up the terms that I want,
and otherwise you're going to be
punished. But some of these countries
have seen that he doesn't necessarily
abide by the deal frameworks he says
he's going to anyway. So they don't have
a ton of incentives to come forward and
make concessions because who knows what
happens after that.
I just want to step back and think for a
moment here about like what the point of
all of this is for the Trump
administration. There are two big kind
of ideas behind all of this as far as I
understand it. get manufacturing back to
the United States and raise money
through these additional tariffs. Where
are we been on those fronts? On the
impacts of all of this so far, and I
want to first start with the easier of
these two, the raising money part. How
much money has been raised? How big of a
deal is it? We're bringing in tariff
revenue at record setting rates. You
know, Scott Bass, the Treasury Secretary
referred to having collected about
hundred billion dollars in tariff
revenue. That's a little misleading
because we already collected tariff
revenue, right? So, it's about $50
billion of additional tariff revenue,
but that's real money.
Okay?
But it's important to remember who's
paying that, right? That's being paid by
importers, right? Which means American
companies and one way or another that's
going to end up passing through into the
American economy, whether that's through
the companies being paying it and losing
it in their profit margins or ultimately
it getting passed on to consumers. So,
yes, it's revenue for the federal
government, but it's revenue that you
and I in some form or fashion are
ultimately paying.
But is that true? Because I'm wondering
if we've actually seen the price
increases that we were warned about.
Yeah. I mean, so I think it's it's
funny, right? Because the president is
saying, "Oh, you know, tariffs are going
to bring back manufacturing jobs." So
far, we've been losing manufacturing
jobs. Critics are saying, "Oh, tariffs
are going to raise prices and slow down
the economy." So far, prices have
continued to moderate and the economy
has remained relatively solid. Right.
So, on some level, it's sort of defying
all the narratives and the economy is
kind of trucking along.
Wait, can you just pause on that for a
second? Are you saying that prices
haven't gone up?
Yeah. So, it's complicated. Overall,
inflation has continued to cool, right?
So, we have not seen this sort of big
jump in consumer prices. If you zoom in
and if you look at products that we're
importing from China, for example, you
do see some evidence that some of that
is picking up, but not in a not in a
sort of a crazy way. And even though, as
Anna said, we have seen higher tariffs
than we've seen historically, it's it's
not at this sort of wild level that was
being threatened back in April. And so
instead, what we see is this sort of
gradual impact, gradual erosion that's
going to take time to play out in the
economy. But for now at least, even with
this kind of historically high effective
tariff rate, we're not seeing prices go
up yet is what you're saying. What does
that mean? Like what's going on there?
Does that mean companies are largely
eating the cost of the tariffs, the the
hundred billion? Because that that
surprises me.
I think it has surprised a lot of
people, but maybe it shouldn't have,
right? It's going to take time, even in
the best of circumstances, for companies
to sort of figure out how they're going
to make their pricing decisions, right?
It's not like tariff hits and you
immediately pass on that price, right?
That's something that takes time. And
companies because they saw this coming,
rushed to buy products, to import. We
saw a huge surge of imports in the first
months of this year as companies rushed
to bring things in before the tariffs
hit. What that means is they've got a
whole bunch of inventory that's sitting
there that they didn't have to pay the
high tariffs on. And that gives them a
little bit of wiggle room to make some
decisions about how they're going to
pass on these prices or not. And then
you have this uncertainty element.
You've got all of these companies that
are sitting here saying, "I don't know
what the as as Anna was saying, I don't
know what the tariff is going to be. I
don't know what my material costs are
going to be." And so I think that
there's a reluctance to make big
decisions. There's a lot of sort of
putting it on hold. And that's true on
the price level, but it's also true on
hiring, on investing. There's just kind
of a a pause in a lot of parts of the
economy right now.
And then of course there's the fact that
when this first happened, you had some
big companies start to say, "We're going
to raise prices. I'm thinking of
Walmart." And Trump comes out and really
hammers them. Maggie, I'm wondering if
you think there's any chance that in
addition to what Ben is saying that
there's a part of this where companies
are seeing that and eating the cost
because they just don't want to piss
Trump off. I I think that's 100% a
reality here and I think that is where
you see tariffs as a weapon that he uses
domestically, not just with countries
overseas or companies that might be
based elsewhere. He has shown that he is
willing, Natalie, not just to publicly
name and shame, which is part of what
you're talking about. You know, we
certainly saw him do it say with Jeff
Bezos when some element of Amazon was
listing what the impact of the tariffs
would be on certain products. It wasn't
across the website, but there was some
aspect of it and that was undone in like
an hour. Anna, I want to turn now to
bringing manufacturing back to the US.
That was the stated goal of these
tariffs, right? And obviously
manufacturing wasn't going to come back
in three months, but do we see any signs
that companies are moving in that
direction that they're at least trying
to move some of their operations back to
the US as a result of all the tariff
pressure they're seeing? So in the data
so far it seems like no we're not seeing
you know evidence that for example
company spending on new factories is
increasing. It looks like company
spending on new manufacturing facilities
has kind of trended downward in the last
few months since Trump came into office.
We've also seen a loss in manufacturing
jobs in recent months. So the overall
jobs numbers for the United States have
been strong, but that that's actually
been boyed a lot by health care and you
know certain sectors actually factories
are losing thousands of workers in the
last few months.
Yeah. And I I think to piggyback on what
Anna is saying there, the way that these
tariffs have been rolled out have really
sort of undermined some of the
president's stated goals on this. And
and I hear that when I talk to
economists, but also when I talk to
businesses. So, if you're a business
right now, if you're a manufacturer
thinking like, "Hey, maybe I should step
up my manufacturing in the US,"
you really don't have the information
you need to make that bet, you don't,
you know, you say, "Oh, well, I'm going
to enjoy some protection here from these
tariffs." And then they get removed a
month later or they never take effect.
And so, I I think that even to the
extent that these policies might sort of
theoretically work, this set of policies
as they've actually been implemented is
not likely to yield that result. Yeah,
that's that's a great point. And I mean
moving supply chains takes, you know,
many months, can take years and billions
of dollars, right? So these are
long-term investments and the president
has been moving in contrast on kind of a
daily or hourly timeline in terms of
shifting the strategy. He's also been
working from a framework as if it is
still 199. You know, we are in a very
different economy. a lot of what he is
looking to restore is going to be. It's
not just that it takes time. It's that
it's so impractical for some of these
companies. You can take Apple as an
example. To Ben's point, I'm I'm not
sure how much of this is going to
materialize the way he believes it will.
And I certainly know Tim Cook made that
clear to him.
I feel like what all three of you are
sort of saying is that we are just in
really early days here. We don't quite
have a verdict on this. And maybe it's
sort of misguided to even be measuring
this by short-term gains.
Yeah. Why are we doing this episode at
all, Natalie?
I think what we can say with confidence
right now is one, there are costs to
these policies that are ultimately going
to be borne by the American people in
one form or another. and that the
benefits, whatever they might be, are
not likely to be as clear as they might
be if if these policies were rolled out
in a different way.
[Music]
We're going to pause for a break because
um Ben, not only are we doing this
episode, but we're going to do a whole
other half of this episode. And when we
come back, we're going to talk about
some of the bigger potential impacts of
all of this tariff drama.
We'll be right back.
Ben, I have to ask about one of the big
fears that has been baked into all of
this from the beginning, which is a
recession. The idea that companies could
pull back on hiring and expanding, that
people would lose jobs, the economy
would shrink, that does not seem to have
happened. We've seen good job numbers
month after month. How should we think
about the economy right now, Ben?
Yeah. So I think that if you again go
back to that April 2nd period, there
were a lot of uh Wall Street forecasters
uh economists who were warning of a real
risk of an imminent recession as a
result of that. But then Trump pulled
back and so what we're seeing now
instead are predictions that rather than
that being this one acute thing that
looks like a big recession, that it's
more kind of a slow drip. Uh somebody
compared it to a Brexit scenario.
Britain leaves the European Union and
instead of there being sort of some
immediate recession, their economy is
just weaker for an extended period of
time.
Yeah. Yeah. The the sky didn't fall in
the case of Brexit either, you know,
like we're not seeing some major meteor
hit.
Yeah. But we know from other evidence,
right, that Americans are not feeling
good about the economy and we saw a real
decline in all measures of consumer
confidence uh early in in Trump's term.
What's interesting, right, is we went
through the same thing under Biden,
right, when voters didn't feel good
about the economy, but they kept
spending money and the economy basically
looked okay. And and here we are sort of
again in the same realm of voters don't
feel good, but they're continuing to
spend and we don't see that much
evidence of economic damage.
Maggie, do you get the sense that
there's any hesitancy in the White House
right now about restarting these
tariffs? you know, like that pushing for
these broader tariffs now might have a
negative impact on the economy when you
have all of these vulnerabilities
potentially with voters around this, you
know, at a moment when they don't feel
that good about it. Yeah. People keep
saying to me Trump's poll numbers are
sliding and it's really choose your own
adventure. His numbers are actually
pretty stable. They've gone down a
little bit certainly on how the voters
view him in terms of the economy. that
has changed on that specific question
and that's a warning sign for him. Where
his advisers get concerned is that he
has turned talking about tariffs into
his entire public facing economic
discussion and that does risk having
voters start to get concerned about what
it means for them and maybe make that
association of oh this is why you know
my paycheck is not going as far as it
was. But Trump has proven remarkably
durable at being able to keep saying
something that isn't necessarily the
case and having his voters believe it. I
I just want to make sure I'm getting
this. Maggie, you're saying his numbers
on the economy have changed like people
have kind of soured on him in that
respect.
Yeah. If you look at the cross tabs,
Natalie, on Trump, I'm paraphrasing on
on what the exact question is because
every pollster asks it a little bit
differently,
but how people feel about his handling
of the economy. It used to really be his
calling card. It was his strength over
Hillary Clinton in 2016. It was
certainly his strength over both Joe
Biden and then Kla Harris. That is now
underwater. That specific metric. There
are warning signs that that voters are
not happy. It's just not that they are
necessarily saying and therefore I wish
Trump wasn't president or and therefore
I don't want Republicans to be in power.
M one thing to remember about this
president Natalie is I mean he he he has
to be fair to him been saying you know
that NAFTA was a terrible deal for 30
years but he he didn't discard NAFTA he
redid a version of it right I mean like
we're not looking at like an entirely
wholesale change in trade
what you just said Maggie is sort of
that while Trump talks about kind of
reimagining the global system of trade
in these kind of big maximalist terms.
At the end of the day, what we've seen
in his record is that he he does a deal.
He is making changes, but he's not
upending the whole system. No. Well,
he's upending the whole system in the
sense that there is a lot of chaos and
unpredictability, right? And people
don't feel like they can know what's
happening dayto-day, but inconsistency
is not an entirely changed dynamic. And
this is not some whole new economy. You
know, he is a developer who yes, he has
built some properties like Trump Tower,
but often what he does is he takes over
somebody else's partly built property or
a property that didn't work and then
changes them into a Trump property. And
there's some aspect of that now what he
is doing.
We've been talking about a situation in
which Trump is not building something
from scratch. He's not remaking the
system out of whole cloth. you know,
companies are maybe betting on that. I'm
wondering if China, if the relationship
with China is the exception, you know,
it's been the stated priority of this
trade war for a long time now. Anna, is
that still the case? Does Trump still
have his eyes trained on China? Is he
still wanting to go big, at least in his
aggression trade-wise, with that
country?
You know, it's true that the subtext of
a lot of these global trade negotiations
has been about China. So with Vietnam,
part of what the president said had been
agreed to is that the Vietnamese will
have lower tariffs on products that they
send, but then higher tariffs on
products that have um a certain amount
of Chinese content in them. But it's
really not clear how the United States
is going to enforce that. But we know
that's something that they've been
discussing with other nations in Asia,
Malaysia, for example. Um it's something
the Trump team has brought up with
Europe and Mexico,
right? That that does seem directed at
isolating China, right?
Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean there's
definitely a, you know, kind of global
effort to look at Chinese products that
are getting into the United States
through other countries and finding
these loopholes into the United States.
So that activity has been going on since
the first Trump administration when we
had really high tariffs on China and
there definitely is part of the
negotiations right now that aims to
counter that. I want to turn to the
markets here because we saw that after
liberation day, the first kind of April
tariff day, the market seem to play a
pretty outsized role in moving Trump to
scale back to put those tariffs on
pause.
Do you think that the market's going to
react to this new chapter of the trade
war the way that it did last time? Do we
have any early signs of that? and and if
not, why?
I mean, so far they certainly have not.
And and it seems that for the most part
investors are betting that this is a
bluff again and that there will be
further extensions. Now, that raises the
risk that if these actually do take
effect and it looks like they're going
to stick that then the markets will
react in a in a much larger way. There
are hints of concerns among bond buyers
that that you know are related not just
to tariffs now but also to this big
beautiful bill and the trillions of
dollars that it added to the debt. I
think that's where the concerns are now
in the bond market which could end up
having a real impact on on Trump and
what he's able to do. But it it's not
we're not seeing the kind of you know uh
violent reaction that we saw back in
April.
Okay, just stepping back. I want to
think about where we are here and the
reality that Trump is still in this kind
of halfin halfout trade war. I I want to
talk about how we think about that in
the larger context of how Trump uses his
power. I I think it's fair to say that
the president has been remarkably
successful at exercising his power over
all kinds of realms in these first
several months of his term and basically
forcing many people to bend to his will.
Congress, universities, law firms, Iran
even. Why does it seem like these trade
deals are exempt from that or like the
one thing that seems to be beguiling
him? Maggie
because you can't threats work to a
point with global trade and with global
markets but they have their own sets of
concerns and dynamics and behaviors. He
has levers that he is able to push and
pull with say universities or law firms
that he was threatening with executive
orders or even you know individuals. You
can't force the markets to bend to your
will. the same way. You can't force
other countries to bend to your will the
same way. And what ends up happening is
because the world is built on alliances,
you risk pushing countries toward your
adversaries, not closer to you, not just
militarily, not just in terms of defense
alliances, but in terms of trade and in
terms of all kinds of other dynamics.
And I do think the backing off hurts
him.
Yeah. I mean, I think on some
fundamental level, right, Trump has been
able to rewrite the political rule book
in the US. He's been able to write the
legal rule book to some degree in the US
thanks to both Congress and the Supreme
Court. He can't rewrite the rules of
economics.
And there's this fundamental level that,
you know, he could go and impose these
steep tariffs on China, on on the
European Union, all of these countries.
He he apparently has the power to do
that, but he can't control what happens
as a result of that. And I think if
you're a company right now, you do not
have the confidence that whatever gets
put in place is going to be the long run
reality. And so there's going to be a
lot of hedging of bets. There's going to
be a lot of spreading around of supply
chains and and probably some
inefficiencies that that result from
that.
Anna, yeah. No, I I agree with Ben. I
think the economy is a really big and
complicated place. So we don't, you
know, immediately see some of the
effects of these tariffs, but they are
there and they are real. It's, you know,
hundreds of billions of dollars that the
United States is collecting and that has
real implications for trade and for
companies.
Ben, I I'm just struck by the fact that
you said, you know, that he can't rewire
the economy, right? But at the same
time, it appears like he is doing all of
these really big things to put his stamp
on it.
I I do think this this is Trump's
economy now, right? He spent the first
several months of his term trying to
blame things on Joe Biden. You know, I
won't take any view as to how voters
will view this, but certainly he's been
able to put in place the tariffs that he
wanted to put in place. He's been able
to get his tax bill through. you know,
he he blames some things on Jerome
Powell, the the Fed chair, but he's
going to get his own Fed chair starting
in in May when he gets to appoint
somebody. So, we are at a point where
whatever happens in the economy, there
there's no one to blame or no one to
take the credit if things work out other
than him. This is his economy at this
point.
[Music]
Thank you guys so much for being here.
We really appreciate your time.
Thanks, Natalie.
Thanks. Great to be here.
Thanks for having us.
On Wednesday, President Trump posted
letters informing a host of additional
countries that they should prepare for
double-digit tariff rates, bringing the
number of countries facing new tariff
threats to 22.
The highest tariff rate that Trump
threatened was 50% on Brazil.
The Brazilian president responded by
saying the country would retaliate.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know. Today
in Texas, the authorities confirmed that
at least 119 people had died in the
recent flooding and more than 170 remain
missing, raising the prospect that the
death toll could climb much higher.
Officials have struggled to answer
questions about their response to the
floods and whether a lack of warning
sirens and insufficient disaster
planning may have made the tragedy
worse. When asked about investigating
what went wrong, Texas Governor Greg
Abbott said that those kinds of
questions were the words of losers. He
compared disaster response to football
and said only losing teams focused on
their failures.
And new data on Wednesday showed there
have been more measles cases in the
United States in 2025 than in any other
year since the virus was declared
eliminated in 2000.
More than,288
people had a confirmed case of the
measles this year. 92% of them were
unvaccinated or had an unknown
vaccination status. Most of this year's
cases were tied to an outbreak that
began in January in a Menanite community
in West Texas and then spread to New
Mexico and Oklahoma.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn, Sydney Harper, and Olivia Nat. It
was edited by Mark George with help from
Paige Cowat. Contains original music by
Dan Powell and Alicia Etup and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitf. See you tomorrow.
[Music]